INTERVIEWER 1: The more you can talk without our questions-- 

LEON WEINBERG: Yeah, question. 

INTERVIEWER 1: --the more. 

CREW: OK? 

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. 

CREW: I want to charge way back. 

LEON WEINBERG: I guess want to know my name. Leon Weinberg is the name. I was born in Poland in 1925. That made me-- I was 13 years old when the war broke out. Well, my life in Poland before the war was-- I guess, was as normal as anybody could picture a young Jewish boy from a middle income family growing up in a big city. I was born in Lodz, which is one of the biggest city in Poland. 

I went away Hebrew school, which is a, uh, not a cheder-- Hebrew school. And when the war broke out, I was just about finished with my public Hebrew school and ready to go on to gymnasium, which is high school, as I'm sure you know. My family was my father, mother, an older sister, and a younger sister. Plus a very large, larger family, like aunts, uncles which I-- I would guess they amounted to about maybe 200 people or maybe more. 

Uh, as far as before the war, my growing up was without any special happenings. Uh, never thought of the future, just like any I would say young-- younger boy here in the United States. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Anything very nice from that time? 

INTERVIEWER 1: Bar mitzvahs? 

LEON WEINBERG: Bar mitzvah? Uh, them days bar mitzahs were only a birthday party where you invited 12, boys, or 13 kids, 20 kids, whatever you living room or whatever house you lived in allowed. But this wasn't no elaborate parties like we have here. 

It was a small affair. It was more of a going to the synagogue, having your havdalah. And then it's a birthday party. It's all it was really. And, uh, the, uh, happy memories, there were some-- school, kids. I was involved in a lot of sports activities, belonging to a sports club and playing table tennis, soccer, like any other normal, I would say, teenager. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, what happened when the war came out? 

LEON WEINBERG: Well, uh, in 1938, we didn't even, as a boy, naturally, as a kid at that age, I didn't even pay much attention to Hitler and Germany or-- or politics to the world. Because we only about 10, 11 years old. And actually when the war broke out, just when the rumors started that something very uncertain about what's going to happen to us Jews. 

And the first thought my parents had was maybe we can take our kids. Since that we had some family United States, maybe we'll ship 'em to the United States that they'd be safe. But before we could even get managed or arranged, after about a week of 193-- that was 1938. Just about a week after the war started, 10 days the Germans were in our city. So that left all the other dreams, naturally, as far as going to the United States or escaping, anything else. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember them marching in? 

LEON WEINBERG: Pretty well. I, uh-- I-- I can't even remember the feeling. It was fear. But I don't think it was fear. As a young man, I don't think we were afraid of anything. We just-- all these, eh, eh, rumors were about Hitler, about Jews, about mistreating Jews, for myself being that age, which is something. 

And you always think it's not going to happen to us. It happened someplace else. And I remember exactly that day when the Polish army was leaving the city. And the following day the Germans walked in, marched in. 

I don't know. I-- in fact, at that time as kids, we stood on the street. We watched them come in. not knowing what to expect. And they looked to me like- like Roman gladiators with their-- with their panzer trucks, with their tanks marching through the city. 

But it wasn't fear at that time. It was just uncertainty. We didn't know what to expect. And it was a feeling, god will give, something will happen. Nothing wrong will-- nothing's going to happen to us. And just the first few days of them in the city of where I come from, in Lodz, were just about quiet. 

But just that's one about around 19-- the end of-- just the beginning of 1939, that's where things started happening. By happening, I mean, well, the city I lived in, Lodz, had a population of 700,000 to 800,000 people. There were 300,000 Jews in the city where I lived. 

And naturally, it was just before Passover in 1939 April when we found out that the ghetto is going to be formed in the city of Lodz, which was that time the name was changed to Litzmannstadt, the German name for Lodz. We were a few of the lucky ones. Because the part of the town where I lived in was it was going to be the part of the ghetto. So we didn't have to leave our apartment. 

Uh, so we just stayed where we are. Only thing, we had to congest a little bit. Because in about one week, that whole part of town swelled from a population-- that part of the city-- from a population of probably maybe for 40,000 or 50,000 people to about 300,000. 

And plus every day, all night, people were brought in from the outskirts of the Lodz, too. To know exactly how many people there were? I don't remember. 

I don't know. There could have been 300,000 or 400,000 Jews pushed together. And I could see them like now coming in with a carriages. 

And fact-- there were no cars. Everything was taken away. There was no-- there were no motor vehicles, which were there never that many in Poland before there war anyway. But the little the was, they was taken away. 

So people would come in. Uh, how do you say? They would, uh, uh, schlep the, uh, little wagons, two-wheel wagons, whatever that belonged them, whatever they could save. 

And, uh, how they settled in, what happened to them, I-- I don't even know. I know that they slept in schools and factories, wherever they could-- they could push them in. That's where the life and death was started. I spent-- I spent four years in the Lodz ghetto. 

I don't know if people realize what a ghetto means. It's not a ghetto what we know now a ghetto. Ghetto is a-- is an area of town fenced around. It wasn't just-- fence wasn't there for fun that you can walk back and forth. There were guards, German guards, placed, oh, probably every 100 feet, 150 with, uh, posts. 

And the only way in or out was only for official people bringing in the little food we used to get from the outside. And it took a few, oh, just a few months. And we were organized in a little small self-ruling government with Jewish policeman, Jewish President. Uh, I don't-- it was at a government run by Jews, but naturally overlooked by the Germans. 

And the only Germans we saw were the gestapo fuhrers who would come in, walk through the city, drive through the city. And in fact, they started factories. We worked in factories producing clothing for the German army, shoes for them. 

Uh, I myself happened to be working the same trade I'm in now which is bakery. But people-- the worst part-- the-- the-- when things started happening, bad things, wasn't until in 19-- the end of 1940. Things were bad right from the beginning, naturally. Everything was rationed out, ration-- ration of food. 

Clothing-- I mean, there were no clothing. If you had clothing from before the war, that's what you had. You couldn't buy any clothing. 

Food was given to you by ration card, naturally. And naturally, the food ration started get smaller and smaller. Now, I don't know if I could ever-- thinking back what the type of-- or the amount of food we were getting was unthinkable of now. 

Because it got to a point and through the-- through the, uh, year later where we would live on, uh, about 8 ounces of bread a day. There was no butter. It was margarine and a couple ounces of sugar. Like meat-- maybe a, uh, couple ounces of meat a-- a month. 

It was starvation. It got to-- I think in 1940, in the Lodz ghetto, people were dying at the rate-- I don't have the exact figures. But there was no more-- there were no more funerals. At the beginning, we had a funeral. 

If someone died, there was a real Jewish funeral. But it got to a point afterwards where people were taken away in the-- in the funeral carts with the horse and wagon, naturally, 10, 12 in one-- in one wagon piled up on top. 

INTERVIEWER 2: Now, what did you see? 

INTERVIEWER 1: What did you think? 

LEON WEINBERG: At that time, I-- the only thought in them days was hunger. You woke up in the morning hungry. And you went to sleep hungry. 

Now, I don't know if too many people realize that when you are hungry, there is nothing else in the world which matters. I was hungry for four years. I never had my belly full in four years. 

I don't think any thought. There's nothing else when you're hungry, you-- you-- it gets to a point where you don't mind stealing from your own sister, from your own father. There were-- there were families, good people, friends of mine, ourselves, where everybody would get their ration of bread. 

Now, this is how people get to be after-- after being hungry and being-- how do you say? They're being degraded, brought to a point where they have no more, uh, self-respect. I would get up in the middle of night and slice a piece of bread off my sister's ration. 

Not I-- you would never picture me-- and I can't even imagine myself doing that now. But it happened. Parents my parents, will never do that to me. But as kids, we would try to steal-- steal away, or-- not thinking the harm it will do. 

But I don't know. I don't even remember the feeling. It was just that there was just nothing else in your mind but hungry. I-- I often thought that this got to be a way of really getting people to hate each other, breaking up families, or breaking up, or breaking down the morale of people with not feeding them. 

And family of mine, not my own-- my-- I'm not talking about my father, mother, or sisters, but relations, uncles. I had an uncle of mine who was a-- he was a principal in a school before the war. His, uh, wife was a teacher, very well-educated. 

The kids-- highly educated. And whenever I used to go visit them or stop by there, I would never believe those were the same people. People with everyone-- and this is only a year after the war has started. And this happened only in a few months. It didn't take longer than a few months. 

Those are highly intelligent people, very well-educated. I would say, you know, class of people now, you wouldn't picture them being on each other-- on each other's throats. They were sitting there in their apartments. 

Everyone would have his own or her own dish. And don't you touch it. After they got through eating, they would just put it away that the other person wouldn't find it. 

Now this happened in a city. This happened in the town where we lived a normal, pretty good life before the war, very decent life. We were pretty well, um, on today's standards I would say very well-to-do. 

And that happened. It changed in a half a year or three or-- or-- or nine months. That's something I can't now, after all these years, figure out how it happened, how people can change. And I know I'm trying to excuse myself for the-- for the thoughts I have or the things I do-- is-- is hunger. 

That's the only thing I-- there's no other thought I had. We would have-- we were still young. Naturally, we have a bunch of-- we had friends we'd get together. 

What do young people talk about now? We would talk about food, how nice it would be to have something to eat, instead of we just sit down if we would sing or we would just try to have fun. We would-- the final conversation would come on food. 

And no matter what we try to do, it was always one thought, going home hungry, going out and getting up in the morning hungry. And it's funny. You know, I can't even think-- that's the only thing I hear. Do you think of is-- food? 

Now, people-- tell people, don't-- now, with-- with-- with all the plentiful food we have here. And you think back so many years. You say, how can you-- how can you have thought of food? Things were bad. Well, that's what it was. It was hunger. And things are starting to get very, very bad. 

On top of that in 1942, that's where the start-- that's when they start taking out people to labor camps. That's when there wasn't just people dying. It was people being taken away to be sent to, eh, labor forced labor camps. 

INTERVIEWER 2: People dying? 

LEON WEINBERG: I see-- 

INTERVIEWER 2: People mistreating other people? 

LEON WEINBERG: I seen people who I've known for years, people on our-- in our apartment house where they start swelling up from their ankles. That's where you-- when you-- when you water-- this I understood-- it starts setting into your bottom of your legs. And the swelling-- they were walking around. Their legs were that wide from swelling. 

And you could see. And we had an expression. It was funny expression among the young. Uh, we used to call them in Jewish, we used to call them, the, uh, uh, Muselmann, meaning he has only got a couple of days, and then he'd be gone. He'd be dead tomorrow. 

And you could tell. You could tell how long the person's going to last. As soon as, I guess, the swelling hit his heart, that was-- it was-- he was done. And but when you start seeing your own relatives, it get to a point it just didn't mean nothing-- another dead person. 

I seen people-- I seen people alive today and not dying, but carried away and-- and not even a decent funeral. Because there was no time for funerals. There were-- there were-- you couldn't afford the funeral. There was no use for a funeral. 

And secondly, the-- the funeral hearse couldn't take him-- take one person at a time. Because they would never get through. I understand, uh, seeing figures now that in 1942, I think there was something like I don't know how many thousands of people dying in the Lodz ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: When did you leave the ghetto? 

LEON WEINBERG: Well, I stayed in the ghetto-- like I was saying, the-- the-- the labor camp started coming in, the labor commanders. I did all kind of work in the ghetto. I was working at on-- on-- on buildings. 

I was working as a-- as a taking buildings down. I was working cleaning up toilets. I was working. You name it, I did any kind of work. 

And for some reason, I was left in the ghetto-- I guess I was lucky at that point though, because I'm still alive now-- until 1944. At that time, there were camps already. We didn't-- in fact, when people were going out, out of the ghetto, with transports, like 1,000 or 2,000 people at a time, and that was-- that probably was the worst. The worst period of my life is the way we were taken out of the ghetto to work. 

The way it happened, it would happen anytime in a day, the middle of the night, or-- or in the daytime. And the Sonderkommando, what they call the Gestapo, would come in. A few officers with a couple of dogs, and they would come. In Europe, as you know, the courtyards-- they would come in the courtyard and blow their whistle. 

And everyone in that house, in that apartment, has to come down to the-- to the yard. And that would be a selection then. And naturally, everyone-- I remember my mother, she put a lot of makeup on herself to make herself look good, young. 

Because they would pick people. You never knew who they going to pick-- the young ones, the good looking ones, the healthy ones, the-- the sick ones. So you just took a chance. 

And they would just pick. And every day, they would pick a few people on the truck. And they would disappear. 

Never heard of them. Never knew what happened. Rumors were they were taken to either Treblinka-- we didn't know about Auschwitz. 

I, myself, didn't know the first thing about Auschwitz. Fact, I didn't knew nothing what was going on outside of the ghetto. No news could come into the ghetto. 

INTERVIEWER 1: Change tape- We have to change the tape. 

